foreign
[Music]
accomplishment where we explore how
deepening connection with ourselves and
others leads to creating the life we
want with enjoyment and ease
[Music]
and welcome back everybody
today's episode is a coaching session
with a listener named Christopher who
recently brought Joe onto his own
podcast called do explain Christopher
has graciously offered to publish this
session without anonymity and I'm really
excited to share it with you
Christopher wants to stop postponing his
enjoyment in life this session opens up
an exploration of what can happen when
we bring enjoyment into any moment even
the experience of chronic pain
on that note we want to remind our
listeners that this is coaching the
conversations we have on this podcast
are not intended to diagnose treat or
cure any disease or mental health
disorder thanks for listening and please
enjoy yourself
I have
um I have a very intense somatic
practice that I've been doing for a few
years now and
I'm out of weird stage right now where I
feel like I've punctured
um a thick layer of psychological
defense yeah in a way where
um stuff is leaking out and it's very
hard somatically to block it it takes a
lot of energy like it's close to the
surface all the time
and so I'm wondering in this context
when I do it myself it looks kind of
like an exorcism so I make weird noises
and I oh I move and I you know it's very
alien and I'm slightly self-conscious
that if we
yeah when we work through emotional
material here that that's going to be
um
should I give in to what I would usually
do when I let emotions move and and and
my body move or will it be as authentic
as possible like like follow your follow
yourself and there's okay there's
nothing you're gonna do that I haven't
seen and there's nothing that you're
gonna do that's gonna scare me and yeah
it's okay
yeah enjoy yourself and like let your
body do what it needs to do
oh that's scary okay man if you say so
[Laughter]
okay you could not be yourself that's
fine too would you prefer that no no I
like that I like that idea
so
um yeah what do you want to what do you
want to use our session
about like what's what's going on what's
your biggest thing happening
um yeah so I was thinking about how to
uh summarize it right before and there
are two things that I think might
might be very tied together or even
basically the same thing yeah and that
is
um
I want to stop postponing enjoyment into
uh an abstract imaginary future
and I want to
how about right now
how do you mean if I'm enjoying it now
how do you enjoy yourself right now yeah
I am enjoying it
and and uh and the second thing I wanted
to get into there is how can I find like
how can I do it I I I want to hear that
second thing but I want to stick to the
first one which is
okay you're telling me that you want to
not have enjoyment as an abstract thing
in the future and you're telling me
you're enjoying yourself right now and I
see this big smile on your face
and I see your and I see your head is
confused I see like your your thoughts
are like not quite jiving so what's
happening
right
yeah I I feel like I can get glimpses of
it
and that I oscillate in and out of it
okay are you enjoying saying that
yes okay okay yes all right so you're
gonna enjoy oscillating in and out of it
mate you can't you can't get into it so
fast man we gotta hold off on the inside
all right okay okay
right but okay so let me reframe it how
do I how do I find my way back there
when I tend to get stuck into you know
thinking about the next thing oh oh
tomorrow I'm gonna do this and then I
kind of rush through the day to get
there or in a week from now or when my
paints are gone or you know
um I I think that's the the major thing
I I feel like I've spent a lot of time
there
um
come again is that is is it or what
you're saying is like how do I get back
to enjoying myself when I forget to
enjoy myself is that what you mean like
what do you what exactly are we talking
about
so you have this moment I get the fact
that you have a moment and the moment is
you get caught up in some sort of future
which may or may not be enjoyable
they're getting caught up in and then
the next thing you know you're rushing
through your day forgetting to enjoy
yourself
right so what I'm well so let me let me
ask it this way is there anything about
rushing through your day that can't be
enjoyed
is there anything about my day that
can't be enjoyed rushing through my day
rushing through my day
is the issue that the rush prevents
enjoyment or is the issue that you
forget to enjoy yourself that that's
some some version of that is what I'm
asking
I mean oftentimes I feel like I'm I'm
even running away from what is going on
right now even more than chasing what's
coming
uh so wait run it but what's going on
right now is enjoyment what are you
running away from
uh
okay so so last time I spoke to you I
mentioned that I have
um
chronic illness yeah a lot of pain and
uncomfort yeah
and so I'm sorry I don't remember I'm
just sorry that that's the case for you
yeah
the Hanks man yeah
um yeah and and that is something that I
I don't remember how it was before then
at this point but now
yeah a lot a lot of the time it's uh
yeah it's it's a part that wants to get
away from that for sure
gotcha
so in this moment right now you're
feeling some sadness
and what would stop you from enjoying
the sadness
I noticed that you're breathing or
something to try to
get into yourself and I'm just curious
what happens if you just enjoy what's
happening
the sadness I think I'm okay with but
there's probably a a hint of uh
self-consciousness there or not wanting
to appear like a victim or or something
like that
um
you're a victim bro you're a victim to
chronic pain
yeah
I feel really ashamed about that
what does it say about you that you have
chronic pain that makes you ashamed
I shouldn't be like this
what what for what reason
because of an inconvenience to people
yeah it's not fun to be to be around
it's not uh it's draining for people
how much of that is a projection
there's this thing there's this weird
thing maybe like 10 times in my life
I've I've
met somebody and within like five or ten
minutes I'm like you've been a caregiver
to somebody haven't you
I you you've like stopped you put your
life on hold to care for somebody
haven't you
yeah and they're like yeah how do you
know and I'm like because your heart is
so soft
because there's such an openness in you
like there's a way that somebody who's
given care for somebody for years and
years and years
it softens them
right and in fact a lot of parents are
softened by The Experience if they're
doing it consciously
so I don't know what
so you might be responsible for
softening people
so how much of it is a projection how
much of it is that
you're assuming your experience for the
other person who's apparently
inconvenienced
yeah I mean it feels hard to say because
I feel like shame is such a um
such a relational feeling and it's such
a strong element of projection in shame
or at least it is for me yeah um
and if you had to guess what would you
say how much of
you you feeling like an inconvenience to
somebody else is actually you feeling
like an inconvenience to yourself
probably a lot of it yeah
okay so you're feeling the shame
what how would you enjoy your shame
I mean
I feel like uh when I embrace it I I can
I mean people can't see it right now but
you can see that my body is uh kind of
moving like uh grass in the wind kind of
I feel like I'm
letting it move in a way which feels
kind of nice
um
and right now how would you not enjoy
your shame
convincing myself that I shouldn't feel
it or that you despise me for it
like believing that story
so what is it that stops you from
enjoying your experience
exactly
that's a shame but you were talking
about like going back you were talking
about oh and then next week I'm chasing
something or I'm avoiding something
yeah
what stops you from enjoying chasing or
avoiding what stops you from enjoying
shame what is the essential thing that's
happening
I'm running away from myself maybe
hmm
okay let's explore that
so right now run towards yourself and
see if more enjoyment happens
and now run away from yourself and see
if more enjoyment happens or less
enjoyment happens
yeah yeah
so you had a second thing you said I had
two things I don't want to forget the
second thing what's the second thing
yeah
um yeah so the second thing is
I want to I want to have a really really
deep and
uh
empowered trust in myself and my ability
to
to deal with things uh as and when they
actually show up instead of yeah
preparing a lot for something that might
never happen and worrying about it and
what should I say and you know
yeah so how how are you not doing that
now
listen this was this is definitely I'm
sure whatever it is you prepared for in
our conversation is not what's going on
right now you even said it you're like
wait hold on like we're not supposed to
jump into it this quickly
right right so and so your preparation
didn't happen and here you are prepared
and trusting yourself so tell me what
what am I missing what do you want that
isn't happening
foreign
no I think you're right I think I do
think that I've uh oh no I'm not right
I'm asking a question what what is it
yeah you're saying okay so I think right
so I I think it's true that I do have
already quite a deep trust in myself
um I think there's still a small part
left
that doesn't think so and thinks it's
the whole of me or something like that
and
uh you're defining Yourself by a
characteristic that arises at a smaller
percentage of the time than the rest of
you arises is that what you mean
usually you trust yourself sometimes you
don't but you're defining Yourself by
the part that doesn't instead of the
part that does
right yeah or something like that okay
and an example of that would be
um like speaking in front of people like
for instance I have a new job right now
and like right now there's going to be
at least 10 000 people who listen to
this so yeah okay nice
there we go yeah yeah okay right because
Okay so
I guess somatically I still have kind of
a stress response
yeah before I'm supposed to speak even
though I usually when I get into it I
feel fine
and I don't get bothered by what you
said right there as much as I would uh
starting the podcast or thinking about
it beforehand or okay so so what how
does this stress and enjoyment relate to
each other
or this stress and losing yourself and
not losing yourself or running towards
yourself or running away from yourself
how do they relate
interesting
um
it seems like
yeah running away from myself is tied to
the stress response
okay so let's let's let's be stressed
for a minute and see what it's like to
run towards yourself during stress
because stress happens whether you're
running away from yourself or not
running away from yourself there's going
to be moments of like
somebody saying something that's hard or
everything going wrong or
some timing issue
so how do you how do you run towards
yourself in the time of stress
yeah I'm not sure
so right now there's some stress in you
because you can't come up with the
answer to this
okay so how do you enjoy that
just a little bit more yeah
yeah so you just did it how did you do
that
I mean I got I got in words uh kind of a
an eternal voice saying it doesn't
matter
stop stop pulling the brakes or
something like that
oh that's that's amazing
so the way that you leave yourself is
pulling the brakes is that is what am I
is that what you're yeah yeah I feel
like I've had that experience a lot
where
um
I feel yeah I'm really afraid of being
judged
and it feels phenomenologically like an
actually pulling a handbrake or pushing
down a brake pedal uh all the time and
those moments when I when I uh release
that it's so effortless and it's so easy
to be charismatic and to just be
uh loving and open you it's easy to be
you
oh
yeah yeah right
yeah
so I'm curious about something this is
kind of a strange one um the chronic
illness is it autoimmune
it has elements yes okay okay cool so
how how does pulling the brakes relate
to
your chronic illness
and I'm not trying to say causal causer
effect I'm saying
when you pull the brakes with your
chronic illness what happens or how is
your chronic illness a form of pulling
the brakes or how do they relate
yeah my initial response when you said
that was that I mean
if the if the stress response is always
activated when I uh pull the brakes and
this is kind of a stress disorder then
then
that makes sense
um but also I've I've kind of nailed it
down to uh it's been a way to stop me
from expressing my needs and wants
that's a long story there but I so no
it's super apparent if you're the
inconvenience for having it then yeah so
you can't even express your needs when
you're in chronic pain
because that's an inconvenience and I
see it
right so I'm asking um let me also ask a
question so you're hanging out you're
feeling good and then all of a sudden
the chronic pain kicks in
mm-hmm
how do you pull the brakes in that
moment
what do you say to yourself if if
anything what do you say to yourself
that is a form of pulling that breaks
when you experience the pain
I think I get really stuck in what
interventions I need to make to be free
of the pain and that takes me out of the
enjoying the moment that we spoke about
okay hey
so the pulling the brakes is that I have
to fix myself
yeah
okay and so what would your chronic pain
look like if you didn't pull the brakes
I mean just to be clear you could think
about what to do to relieve your pain
and not hold the brakes and that's very
clearly yeah yeah absolutely yeah no
that's I
I can differentiate between those two
fundamental logically as well when I'm
just like okay planning out something
reasonable versus just ruminating and
yeah yeah escaping yeah yeah so what
does your pain look like if what happens
to your experience if you don't pull the
brakes when you experience pain
now I want to say I enjoy myself but
there's something that feels scary about
that too yeah
I'm curious how how often have you just
cried out in pain
you've had the full expression of the
pain
um
more so lately but but the first eight
years or something very rarely yeah yeah
and the more you allow the expression of
the pain to exist what what changes if
anything maybe nothing
I mean there's definitely more
spaciousness around it and there is
there's much more uh
joy and and love and nice emotion it
doesn't feel nearly as bad as I thought
yeah
so there seems to be one one form of the
breaks and maybe they're the same thing
as okay how do I fix myself because I'm
broken and one form is don't express the
pain
don't let my body be in the anguish
fully
yeah
yeah I mean it feels it sounds kind of
obvious now when we're laying it out but
I feel like at some some uh nervous
system level there's still some
resistance to that or
um
yeah what happened when you expressed
your needs or your pain when you were a
kid
yeah I got shun kind of yeah
let's go one step forward what what do
you think it would be like to have your
to ask your wife hey next time I'm in
pain I want to just be in anguish I want
to express the anguish I want my body to
have its full expression and I want you
to hold me and tell you tell me that you
love me
and that it's okay that I'm in pain and
it's okay to express my pain
yeah I mean it would be lovely man
um
we have uh a little bind there however
because she she yeah there's some
uncomfort on her side with that
um
yeah
but yeah that's and my I mean that's
also what I'm noticing in myself this
whole um I told you that I was
very afraid of coming across as a victim
and yet I always have this nagging sense
that when I feel these things I really
want to say it and I want someone to
just say exactly what you said there you
know it's okay to be in pain I love you
anyway
no
it still makes pain the bad guy right
right
if I said that I apologize I don't know
what I said but yeah no I don't think
you said that I don't think you said
that yeah
yeah what do you think makes your wife
um uncomfortable with your pain
our entire relationship has been very
shaped by
um
me trying to get out of it and resisting
it and uh it's limited her options a lot
so her discomfort might not be your pain
your her discomfort may be
watching you try to escape your pain
maybe
yes yeah it might be and I also think
she's afraid of
um not getting her once met and not
getting the life that she really feels
she wants and needs because of my
illness yeah
yeah
and how would it feel to you to hold her
while she
I had the big emotions around
I might not get the life that I want
and not try to fix it but actually just
hold her and be with her in that anguish
I I'd be willing to pay her good money
to do that
so that you could do that
I would actually yeah love it
but she she's always trying to be so
brave
um like you
yeah how's it different you trying to be
brave with your pain and not be the
victim and her like what how is this
different at all
that's a good question yeah
yeah
but that's I mean it feels like that's
um
it becomes this weird Twisted thing
where if you're if you're really
hold on fully and I want to hear
everything you're about to say
and I want you to enjoy saying it
yeah
all right see what happens to your
thought structure when you prioritize
enjoyment yeah
so it's a twisted thing is how you
started yeah
yeah no I get I get more Curious and get
more uh Wonder straight away and I feel
like I um
I don't choke up my voice as much it's
easier to speak
um
yeah so Noah if it felt like in the long
pause there uh it seems like the
uh expressing whatever want I have or
like if I genuinely feel like I want to
express the anguish and the pain and uh
squirm and squeal and ask for help in
that I think that's much much less
um hard for people to deal with than
some kind of Mr in between where it's uh
the want is squished by the
shame and the you shouldn't feel this
and then it becomes this awkward energy
kind of like when someone does something
and feel really embarrassed and then
people get embarrassed rather than just
oh oh I farted oh look at that and
nobody cares right yeah people right
absolutely people
um
that don't want to sit with other
people's shame
like even if you see somebody when they
ask oh this is what I want they're much
more likely to get a yes than if they
say this is what I want and it's full of
Shame
yeah and much more likely to get it now
people just don't want to be around each
other's shame
also so I wanna I wanna try something if
I can Joe yeah of course because uh
you always say that the vulnerable thing
is to say the scary thing yeah and so uh
the scary thing that's true yeah to you
yeah yeah would be if
if you would uh if you would feel
comfortable if if you felt like you
could hold space Oh yes oh yes and say
that you you love my pain and my anguish
and let me be a victim for a little bit
oh yeah
absolutely I can do that
yeah but you gotta look at my face you
gotta see that I I actually do love your
pain and anguish
and for me it's not even holding space
it's a privilege and an honor to be with
it
it [__] sucks to be in pain all the
time and I hate it
[__]
I hate it for you I'm not even
experiencing the pain
I expand
oh [__]
yeah
and at the same time I feel so grateful
that I get to be here at all and I get
to be here with you right now and it's
I'm so grateful for that
see notice what just happened notice
that notice that when you allow that
feeling of victim all the way in and all
the way through
it moves to enjoyment yeah
notice that as you ran towards yourself
which was being in pain and being in
anguish that enjoyment showed up yeah
oh [__]
we're scared that if we allow the
feeling of the victim to be fully there
that will end up being a victim forever
yeah but what it actually just did is
Empower you
right the empowerment that you're trying
to have when you don't allow the victim
just becomes this very natural thing
once you allow it yeah
yeah
it's not a push anymore right it's a
yeah it's an it's a natural flow
yeah that's such a shitty
um uh bind until you get it
yeah then it's easy it's like oh that's
it now all I have to do is allow yeah
yeah
right and so most likely something's
happening in you where you're feeling
your wife's
anguish and feeling responsibility so
you can't fully just be there with her
in it yeah and if you can be there fully
with her in it this is what's on the
other side for her too even if it takes
a couple weeks
yeah you're not gonna have the life you
want because I am in constant pain
and that sucks for you and I and I can
handle that
wow I get goosebumps when you say that
yeah I don't think I've ever said that
to her yeah
yeah
right
thanks Joe
what an awesome awesome pleasure thank
you
um
one other thing uh I don't know if your
wife is a private woman or not but if
she ever wants to do a session with the
two of us I think that'd be super fun oh
wow so we could yeah if she wants to do
it we could work on this together it'd
be really fun wow okay yeah yeah
I will and I understood if she doesn't
want to do that yeah yeah yeah
I uh yeah I hope I get to talk to you
again on the podcast it's always too
short yeah
awesome loved it awesome have a nice day
bye
wow that was fascinating thank you Joe
and thank you Christopher if you want to
hear more from both of them check out
their conversation on Christopher's
podcast do explain
thanks for listening to the art of
accomplishment if you enjoyed what you
heard today please subscribe and rate US
on your podcast app we'd love your
feedback so feel free to send us
questions or comments you can reach out
to us join our newsletter or check out
our courses at Art of accomplishment.com
[Music]